Proposal: Enable secure cross-IP upgrade (#11)
ietf-wg-add/draft-ietf-add-ddr: draft-ietf-add-ddr.md

## Authenticated Discovery {#authenticated}

> If the Unencrypted Resolver's IP address is in a public range, it is considered

Reviewer: This needs a strong definition for "public range", citing the v6 addressing architecture or whatever else applies.

TLS certificate presented by the Encrypted Resolver MUST contain the IP address
of the designating Unencrypted
Resolver within the SubjectAlternativeName certificate field. The client MUST
check the SubjectAlternativeName field for the Unencrypted Resolver's IP
address. If the
certificate can be validated, the client SHOULD use the discovered Designated
Resolver for any cases in which it would have otherwise used the
Unencrypted Resolver. Otherwise, the client MUST NOT use the discovered Encrypted
Resolver. Additionally, the client SHOULD suppress any further queries for
Designated Resolvers using this Unencrypted Resolver for the length of
time indicated by the SVCB record's Time to Live (TTL).

## Opportunistic Discovery {#opportunistic}

If the Unencrypted Resolver's IP address is in a private range, it is considered
a local reference identity that cannot be confirmed using TLS certificates.
Instead, the ability to respond to queries confirms control of the address.
The client MUST repeat the discovery process at least every 5 minutes (e.g. by
limiting the SVCB response TTL) to confirm that the result is still valid, and

> MUST stop using any Encrypted Resolver that is no longer designated.

Reviewer: I think that you are right about the use of MUST.  What I wanted to highlight here was that a specific maximum here needs to be better supported to be strictly mandatory.

Opportunistic Privacy is defined for DoT in Section 4.1 of {{!RFC7858}} as a
mode in which clients do not validate the name of the resolver presented in the
certificate. A client MAY use information from the SVCB record for
"dns://resolver.arpa" with this "opportunistic" approach (not validating the
names presented in the SubjectAlternativeName field of the certificate) as long
as the IP address of the Encrypted Resolver is also a private address (such as
those defined in {{!RFC1918}}). This approach can be used for DoT or DoH.

In order to refer the user to an Encrypted Resolver with a public IP address, the
Unencrypted Resolver MUST return a CNAME that aliases `_dns.resolver.arpa` to

> `_dns.$HOSTNAME`. If the client receives such a CNAME, it MAY proceed with

Author: Sort of.  AliasMode records would work but
1. They wouldn't be any better.
2. They would be slower to fetch on existing resolvers.
3. They would break the partial getaddrinfo compatibility.

That seemed like a good enough reason to mandate CNAME.

TLS certificate presented by the Encrypted Resolver MUST contain the IP address
of the designating Unencrypted
Resolver within the SubjectAlternativeName certificate field. The client MUST
check the SubjectAlternativeName field for the Unencrypted Resolver's IP
address. If the
certificate can be validated, the client SHOULD use the discovered Designated
Resolver for any cases in which it would have otherwise used the
Unencrypted Resolver. Otherwise, the client SHOULD NOT use the discovered Encrypted
Resolver. Additionally, the client SHOULD suppress any further queries for
Designated Resolvers using this Unencrypted Resolver for the length of
time indicated by the SVCB record's Time to Live (TTL).

## Opportunistic Discovery {#opportunistic}

If the Unencrypted Resolver's IP address is a Private IP, it is considered
a local reference identity that cannot be confirmed using TLS certificates.
Instead, the ability to respond to queries confirms control of the address.
The client SHOULD repeat the discovery process at least every 5 minutes (e.g. by
limiting the SVCB response TTL) to confirm that the result is still valid, and

> MUST stop using any Encrypted Resolver that is no longer designated.

Reviewer 2: What if there is a network outage where packets are dropped? I'm concerned that there could be a transient state, unlucky or induced by an attacker flooding the network, where the client ends up being downgraded after previously having been secure.

Author: This is a general concern in either mode.  I've clarified that the discovery process blocks other queries.  Note that this makes the draft sharply incompatible with (hypothetical, horribly broken) SVCB blackhole resolvers.  I'm fine with that.  (Implementers can add an escape hatch if it proves necessary.)

I also added an exemption under "Optimizations" for the case where the client happens to recognize and trust the discovered Encrypted Resolver.

If the Unencrypted Resolver's IP address is a Public IP, it is considered a
global reference identity and is subject to cryptographic authentication.

In order to be considered an authenticated Designated Resolver, the
TLS certificate presented by the Encrypted Resolver MUST contain the IP address
of the designating Unencrypted
Resolver within the SubjectAlternativeName certificate field. The client MUST
check the SubjectAlternativeName field for the Unencrypted Resolver's IP
address. If the
certificate can be validated, the client SHOULD use the discovered Designated
Resolver for any cases in which it would have otherwise used the
Unencrypted Resolver. Otherwise, the client SHOULD NOT use the discovered Encrypted
Resolver. Additionally, the client SHOULD suppress any further queries for
Designated Resolvers using this Unencrypted Resolver for the length of
time indicated by the SVCB record's Time to Live (TTL).

## Opportunistic Discovery {#opportunistic}

If the Unencrypted Resolver's IP address is a Private IP, it is considered
a local reference identity that cannot be confirmed using TLS certificates.
Instead, the ability to respond to queries confirms control of the address.

> The client SHOULD repeat the discovery process at least every 5 minutes (e.g. by
> limiting the SVCB response TTL) to confirm that the result is still valid, and
> MUST stop using any Encrypted Resolver that is no longer designated.

Reviewer 3: Rather than asking clients to repeat the discovery process, it would seem better to ask them to limit the validity of the referral. I'm trying here to avoid idle clients (like a phone with the screen off) generating unnecessary queries and draining battery. An idle device could then choose to let the referral expire, and defer the rediscovery to the time when it becomes active again.
```suggestion

The client SHOULD limit the validity of the discovered information (e.g. by
limiting the SVCB response TTL) to no more than 5 minutes, and MUST stop
using any Encrypted Resolver that is no longer designated. {{Optimizations}}
describes how to avoid periods of unencrypted resolution that could result
from this.

```

same private IP address as the Unencrypted Resolver.

## Limited compatibility with getaddrinfo for IP-based discovery

Clients that access DNS through the `getaddrinfo` API can only issue A and AAAA
queries, and can only receive these records and CNAMEs. Such clients MAY
attempt IP-based discovery ({{bootstrapping}}) by issuing an A or AAAA query
for `_dns.resolver.arpa`. If a CNAME record is returned, it indicates the
DNS server hostname (plus a `_dns` prefix). (The A or AAAA query is not
generally expected to succeed, and is used only to elicit the CNAME.) If the
client already knows how to connect to this server, or is able to determine
how to connect through some other mechanism, it MAY do so.

# Security Considerations

Since clients can receive DNS SVCB answers over unencrypted DNS, in-path
attackers can prevent successful discovery by dropping SVCB packets. When using
IP-based discovery ({{bootstrapping}}), it is not possible to distinguish between resolvers
that do not have a Designated Resolver and such an active attack.
Clients that wish to defend against these attacks MUST use name-based discovery

> ({{encrypted}}) with local DNSSEC validation, or otherwise have an authenticated

Reviewer: Does this mean that a DNSSEC signed record at _dns.$HOSTNAME is a pin in some circumstances?  That is, for the duration of its TTL, if the server is not available, clients might not be able to access DNS service.

Author: As [currently specified](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/draft-schwartz-svcb-dns-02#section-9.2), it's a pin even if not DNSSEC signed.  The theory here is that, even without DNSSEC, you could easily have an adversary who can block your DoT connection but not your bootstrap queries.  You wouldn't want that adversary to cause an automatic fallback to plaintext DNS.
